God, of infinite goodness...
...send prosperous life and long...
...to the high and mighty
Princess of England...
...Elizabeth.
There can be no question
of her legitimacy.
You will prepare a bill to put
before Parliament.
It will state that the line of succession
is now firmly vested in our children...
...and no others.
I shall do
as Your Majesty commands.
I am mindful, Mr. Cromwell,
that there are some people...
...some wrong-headed,
some biased people...
...are still unwilling to accept the
validity of my marriage to the queen.
In view of that, l think some sanction
should be made against them.
Everyone will be given
their opportunity...
...to demonstrate their loyalty.
I am told that the lady
is much dismayed...
...at having given birth to a daughter
and not the son she promised.
To my mind, it is sure proof
that God has abandoned her.
How is my mother, the queen?
Alas, l cannot visit or speak to her.
I have little communications
with her ladies.
And they tell me she is still strong...
...but always begs the king,
your father...
...of his mercy,
to be allowed to see you.
I am sure His Majesty
will one day relent...
...for l think....
I believe with all my heart
that he still loves and cares for me.
Oh, l am sure that he does.
Bishop Tunstall.
Sir Thomas.
Please.
Thank you.
To what do I owe this honour?
We have known each other
a long time, Sir Thomas.
Now you've retired from public life
and l never see you.
Naturally, l was concerned
about your welfare.
I am very well, thank you.
But l am--
I am exercised by the fact
that one of our old acquaintances...
...is still under house arrest.
You mean Bishop Fisher?
Yes, the outcome is regrettable.
The outcome of what?
His intransigence.
I see.
Tell me...
...has the king sent you here
to see me?
His Majesty wondered...
...why you did not attend
the queen's coronation...
...as you were invited to do.
Well, in answer to that, let me--
Let me show my poor mind to you.
There's a story
about the Emperor Tiberius.
He had enacted a law, which exacted
death for a certain crime...
...unless the offender was a virgin.
Now, when a virgin eventually
appeared on the charge...
...the emperor didn't know exactly
how to proceed.
So one of his council proposed
the perfect solution:
Let her first be deflowered
so she then can be...
...devoured.
There are some...
...and, no, l won't name them...
...who first procure you
for the coronation...
...next to preach at it,
and then to write books defending it.
Thus they deflower you...
...and will not fail soon afterwards
to devour you.
But they shall never deflower me.
That was beautiful.
Do you play?
All the time.
-Majesty.
-Lady Eleanor.
Yeah, well, you can take a look.
Never mind.
More like this. Watch.
Fingers like so.
Don't squeeze the arrow.
Draw...
...and release.
I'll never do that.
Yes, you will.
Your Grace, l have him.
Mr. Secretary.
Your Grace.
And your son.
Yes. l'm teaching him how to sport
before l get too old for it.
Do you shoot, Cromwell?
Sometimes, Your Grace.
My lord.
Shall we walk?
What does the king want?
His Majesty would like to see you
back at court with your wife.
He misses Your Grace's company.
And?
His Majesty is aware
that you favour the imperialist cause.
You say so openly in council...
...and have, perhaps, a great
sympathy for the dowager princess.
Don't you?
Actually, I do.
I'm not heartless...
...whatever some people think.
Quite the contrary.
But l serve the king.
His Majesty intends
to vest the succession...
...with the children he will have
with Queen Anne.
A bill will go before Parliament.
He wants to know
if he'll have your support.
-She's hungry.
-Hey.
Hey.
What are you doing?
Your Majesty.
May I not feed her
from my own breast?
Queens don't do that...
...especially not for a daughter.
Give her back to her wet nurse.
The princess will shortly be given
her own establishment at Hatfield.
Among others, the Lady Mary
will attend and wait on her.
Catherine's daughter?
Yes.
It is well that she knows
her new place.
Secretary Cromwell is arranging it.
I will still give you a son.
Come soon, my darling,
to my hot bed.
-Ladies.
-Majesty.
Alice, children?
My dear family,
I have something to say to you.
My income is now
so greatly reduced...
...that we can no longer go on living
as we are accustomed.
I am no longer the recipient
of the king's bounty...
...and so I must live frugally...
...and reduce my household.
Those of you who can
must live in your own houses...
...and eat at your own tables.
It will be okay.
-But, Father--
-No. Come on.
Things inevitably must change.
You can't all be supported forever.
Life is not like that.
Real life is raw...
...and difficult.
And you must face up to that fact.
If not to even worse things.
-Come on, eat up.
-What does Father mean?
Eat your food while it's hot.
Would you pour the wine, please?
Thank you.
Yes, Mother More.
The Lady Mary, Lady Bryan.
Lady Mary.
Welcome to Hatfield,
your new home.
I am Lady Margaret Bryan,
the princess's governess.
These other ladies are also here
to attend the princess...
...as, of course, are you.
Lady Mary, may l present you
to Her Highness...
...the Princess Elizabeth.
You will be shown to your room.
You will begin your duties
in the mornings, after prayers.
I shall say my prayers alone.
This is your room, milady.
Christmas.
Well, why is it, as you get older,
it always seems to be Christmas?
Of course, it is always Christmas
for you, isn't it, my lord?
A baron in your own right now
and some new titles. Remind me?
Master of Buckhounds.
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports.
Was there not another one?
Master of the Bedlam
Hospital for the Insane?
Yes.
Do you plan to visit it?
I don't mean as an inmate.
I read one of your satires
about life here at court.
If l were you, I'd be more careful
about poking fun...
...at those who have the power
to hurt you.
That's just friendly advice.
Here, my love.
I have a gift for you.
It's fantastic.
-Who made this?
-Master Holbein.
The man's a genius.
As are you...
...my beautiful queen.
Happy Christmas.
I could still do it.
I could find a way to poison her.
No.
-l thought that was what you wanted--
-lt would be blamed on my master.
At the moment,
he doesn't need that.
He has a war with the Turks
to contend with.
-But why should anyone ever know?
-Don't be stupid, Brereton.
They would find you and torture you,
and you would tell them everything.
No, I wouldn't.
I'd die a martyr's death.
You have never seen a man
being tortured.
Now, do you understand?
You don't act alone.
Charles.
-Happy Christmas.
-And to Your Majesty.
-l have a gift for you.
-Where is it?
You'll have to wait till
the new session of Parliament...
...for it's my vote.
How could I have ever doubted you?
Eleanor Luke.
You see the way the king
looks at her?
She's his mistress.
Get rid of her.
-Mary.
-Majesty.
We must find you a new husband.
I have another gift for you.
I am with child again.
Your Majesty, councillors...
...here is the new act,
The Act of Succession...
...which I am commanded to present
shortly to the Houses of Parliament.
The act nominates the children born
of His Majesty and Queen Anne...
...as first rightful heirs.
It protects this nation from the great
divisions it has suffered in the past...
...when several different titles
have pretended to the throne.
The act warns that anyone saying
or writing anything to the prejudice...
...or slander of the lawful matrimony
between the king...
...and his most dear and entirely
beloved wife, Queen Anne...
...or against his heirs,
would be guilty of high treason...
...for which the penalty is death...
...and forfeiture of goods
to the crown.
"The new act requires
all the king's subjects...
...if so commanded,
to swear an oath...
...that they shall truly,
firmly, constantly...
...without fraud and guile,
observe, fulfil, maintain, defend...
...and keep the whole contents
and effect of the bill."
This oath will also require recognition
of the king's supremacy...
...in all matters,
spiritual and temporal.
Those who refuse to take it
will be accounted guilty of treason...
...and sent to prison.
That is all well done, Mr. Secretary.
I am pleased.
So it must be sworn by oath after all.
God save us.
Does the king remain obdurate?
Yes, Holy Father.
He refuses to listen to advice.
And he forces all true believers
to perjure their immortal souls.
How so?
They must all swear an oath that the
king is head of the English Church.
Those who refuse are put in prison.
Like our brother in Christ,
Bishop Fisher.
Yes, Holy Father.
This is unacceptable.
The shepherd cannot stand idly by
while the wolf enters the fold...
...and threatens his flock.
I have decided to make Fisher
a cardinal.
You will send his hat to England.
Let's see if the king
is still prepared...
...to prosecute and torture
a Prince of the Church.
-Freshen those horses.
-Yes, sir.
Take them to the stables.
Mistress Bryan.
-A very good morning to you.
-Your Majesty.
I'm on progress.
I've come to see my daughter.
How is she?
She is a credit to Your Majesty
in every way.
My Elizabeth.
Who knows, Mistress Bryan...
...perhaps one day, this little girl
will preside over empires.
Please forgive me.
I don't have much time.
Thank you for all your care
toward our beloved princess.
Your Majesty.
What do you mean?
More exercise for us, l fear.
Lady Eleanor.
-My lord.
How did you suppose
no one would find out your secret?
-l--
-Your chamber was searched today.
My lord?
The jewels were found.
You did not hide them well enough.
-Jewels, l don't--
-Her Majesty's jewels.
The ones you stole.
-lt's not true.
-And I say it is true.
And if your crimes
were ever reported...
...who do you suppose
would believe you?
After all...
...Lady Eleanor...
...no one could accuse you
of being innocent...
...could they?
What am I to do?
Leave court.
Go back to your family.
See if they will have you.
"When her loose gown
From her shoulders did fall
And she caught me in her arms
Long and small
And therewithal sweetly
Did me kiss
And softly said,
'Dear heart, how like you this?"'
Cousin Madge.
Lady Sheldon,
what are you reading?
Nothing, my lady.
Just some poetry.
By Sir Thomas Wyatt.
Give it here.
You should not be wasting your time
on such trifles.
If you must read when you
are supposed to be attending on me...
...then you should read that book.
You will learn a great deal
more from it...
...perhaps even some wisdom.
Yes, madam.
Now go about your business.
The Earl of Wiltshire, Your Majesty.
Papa.
Your Majesty.
You look well.
And l believe
you're already showing.
A little.
How was your trip to Paris?
It was-- King Francis
is not the easiest man to deal with.
He sends you wedding presents...
...yet he pretends he cannot
officially recognise you as queen...
...as long as Catherine remains alive.
How is the king?
He must be pleased
at your condition.
He is.
But...?
Everything is fine.
But when l was last with child,
the king took a mistress.
And now--
Now I fear he will take another...
...since l must be careful
for the sake of the child...
...and not let him enjoy
his conjugal rights.
It is natural for a man...
...when his wife is big with child
and not willing to lie with him...
...to find some temporary consolation
elsewhere.
And for kings,
it is properly expected.
Sweetheart, listen to me.
The danger to you and to us
is not that the king takes a mistress...
...but that he takes the wrong one.
Someone we can't control
or who would seek to control the king.
But if you suppose the king is sure
to take a mistress...
...then make sure
she is your choice...
...and not his.
I must make my report to the king.
I'll see you later.
All right, sir.
-Mr. Secretary.
-Reverend Fisher.
I just came to see
if you were being well treated.
Oh, as to that, my aged stomach...
...cannot cope with the rank food
the jailor brings.
But that is nothing since it pertains
to my body and not my soul.
You have not taken the oath.
No.
Why not?
Do you refuse to accept that the
king's marriage is proper and legal?
I believe His Majesty thinks it so.
But you don't?
No.
I believe
what I have always believed.
The king's marriage
to Queen Catherine is still valid...
...and can be undone by no man,
not even Archbishop Cranmer.
And do you dispute...
...that the king is supreme head
of the Church in England?
Yes, l do. Most emphatically.
The king, our Sovereign Lord,
is not the supreme head on Earth...
...of the Church of England.
Tell me...
...how is Sir Thomas More?
Jailor!
I will...
...see if the quality of your food
can be improved.
Thank you.
Why did you get rid
of Lady Eleanor?
She stole something precious
from me.
Are you sure she stole it?
Yes.
I had the evidence. l had no choice.
I hope Your Majesty
is not too disappointed?
No.
In any case...
...l have something for you.
Your Majesty.
Elizabeth.
Thank you.
What's this?
Majesty, there are a number
of small monastic institutions...
...l have had cause to investigate.
The monks there refuse
to take the oath.
They'd rather serve
the vicar of Rome than you.
This is a bill for their dissolution.
The very considerable wealth
of these houses...
...would thus be transferred
to Your Majesty's exchequer.
Well?
Majesty, I have just heard...
...that the pope intends
to make Reverend Fisher a cardinal.
Apparently, he has already dispatched
a cardinal's hat.
Then Fisher will have to wear it
upon his shoulders.
For, by the time it gets here,
he won't have a head to put it on.
And what of More?
I want to know.
Will he take the oath?
How is she? Does she feed well?
She's good in every way,
Your Majesty.
And hardly cries at all, as if she
already knows that she is a princess.
I love you, Elizabeth.
I love you with all my heart
and l bid you never forget it.
Your Majesty.
Before I leave, I wish to say something
to the Lady Mary.
Lady Mary.
Lady Mary, I am here in kindness.
I would welcome you back to court
and reconcile you with your father...
...if you will only accept me
as queen.
I recognise no queen but my mother.
But if the king's mistress...
...would intercede with the king
on my behalf...
...then l would be grateful.
Sir Thomas More.
Sir Thomas.
Mr. Secretary.
Please be seated.
This is but an informal occasion.
A little ale, perhaps?
No, thank you.
I'm sure we both know the object
which has brought us together.
It is very widely rumoured,
Sir Thomas...
...that you will refuse
to take the oath of succession.
Now, l say this to you
very openly and sincerely...
...that l wish no harm
to come to a great man...
...who has for years enjoyed
and deserved...
...His Majesty's good graces.
I would rather lose my own son
than to see any hurt come to you.
May I ask your opinion
of the king's new marriage?
I have no opinion.
I neither murmur at it
nor dispute upon it.
I never did.
Never will.
Then what of His Majesty's claim
to supremacy...
...over the Church in England?
I was unsure about this matter...
...until l reread
His Majesty's own pamphlet:
The Assertio Septem
Sacramentorum.
In fact, l have....
I have a copy of it here.
Of course, in the pamphlet...
...the king asserts the divine origin
of the papacy.
The pope's supremacy descends
directly from the rock of St. Peter.
I think you'll find His Majesty's
arguments are as persuasive...
...and powerful now as they were
when he first wrote them.
Will you take the oath?
I need hardly remind you
of the consequences of not doing so.
Mr. Secretary,
I am the king's loyal subject.
I say no harm...
...l think no harm,
but I wish everybody good.
And if this be not enough
to keep a man alive in good faith...
...l long not to live.
Sir Thomas.
You should know that the king himself
has no mind to coerce you.
He simply asks you to relent...
...and condescend to his request
that you take the oath.
Mr. Cromwell, please impart
to the king my utter faithfulness...
...truthfulness and loyalty to him.
Lord Farthington is most witty
and most fair.
He is indeed.
I cannot help myself.
-And I noticed he has eyes for you.
-Oh, you know his hand belongs....
What l wouldn't give to marry him.
I agree.
Cousin Madge.
Yes, madam?
Come and talk to me.
I suppose you have many admirers.
Yes.
But l always remember
what Your Majesty told us...
...about not being lewd
and setting a standard.
I'm sure you do.
But would it surprise you to learn
that one of your admirers is the king?
-lt's not true.
-lt is true.
Now, would it surprise you
even more...
...if I told you
that you would have my blessing...
...to become his mistress?
-Madam?
-While I am with child...
...His Majesty needs to be able
to lie with another woman.
He is a passionate man.
But she must be someone
I can trust.
Whose family I can trust, like yours.
After all, we are family.
And you are reformers.
Yes, Your Majesty.
We all gladly took the oath.
Now will you gladly take the king
to your bed?
His Excellence,
the imperial ambassador.
-Excellency.
-Your Majesty...
...forgive me but I come here
upon a mission of mercy.
-Mercy?
-Very much so.
Your daughter, the Lady Mary,
has fallen ill...
...even to the concern
of her doctors.
I have a letter written by her mother.
She would like to nurse her child.
She writes--
If l may?
"A little comfort and mirth with me
would be a half health to her.
I could care for her with my own hands
and put her in my own bed...
...and watch with her when needful."
I will send my personal physician
to examine and help her.
But l cannot allow Mary
and her mother to be together.
But, Your Majesty, it is just the cry
of any mother for any daughter.
But that's just it.
They are not just any mother
or daughter.
Do you not suppose they
would conspire to plot against me?
-l cannot believe it.
-Of course you can believe it.
You know it happens.
And that sometimes illness
is used for political purpose.
Do you not believe that Catherine
wants Mary...
...to be queen above all else?
Mr. Chapuys...
...Lady Catherine is a very proud,
stubborn woman...
...of very great and high courage.
She could muster an army,
take the field...
...and wage a war against me...
...as fierce as any her mother, Isabella,
ever waged in Spain.
Is that not true?
I've been handed a summons
to appear at Lambeth Palace...
...to take the oath.
And l imagine l shall be imprisoned
afterwards.
-No.
-Father.
You must be good to each other...
...and to everyone else.
Or if you cannot be good...
...be the least bad you can be.
No, darling, no.
Father.
Lady Sheldon.
Where's the queen?
Your Majesty,
the queen is feeling indisposed...
...and asks you to forgive her
not riding this morning.
Of course.
She--
She wondered if Your Majesty
would be pleased...
...if I took her place.
Riding, I mean.
If the queen gives her permission...
...then why not?
Lady Sheldon.
You there. Down there.
What's your name, Lady Sheldon?
Margaret, Your Majesty.
Though people call me Madge.
Then l shall call you Madge,
if you'll allow me.
Of course, Your Majesty.
Sir Thomas?
Are you now ready
to swear the oath?
May I see it?
Thank you.
Well?
I don't mean to put at fault this oath
or its makers...
...or any man who swears to it.
And l will never condemn
the conscience of any other man.
But for myself, in good faith...
...my own conscience
so moves me...
...that l will swear
to the validity of the succession...
...yet not the rest of it...
...without jeopardising my soul
to perpetual damnation.
We are very sorry
to hear you say this.
You're almost the first to refuse it...
...and your refusal
will cause the King's Highness...
...to be both indignant
and suspicious of you.
Here are all the members
of the Commons and the Lords...
...who have sworn to take the oath.
-The clergy too.
-l myself cannot swear.
But l do not blame any other man
who has sworn.
Sir Thomas,
we have come to the conclusion...
...that far from being a true
and loyal servant to His Majesty...
...there never was a servant
so villainous...
...so traitorous to his prince as you.
If you refuse to take the oath...
...not only will you be imprisoned...
...but the most horrid things
imaginable will be done to you.
My lords, these threats
are for children, not for me.
Do you deny that you bullied
and persuaded the king...
...against his conscience,
to write this pamphlet against Luther?
Of course I deny it.
In the first place,
I would never ask anyone...
...be he ever so high or so low,
to act against his conscience.
And secondly,
I remember it was His Majesty...
...who persuaded me of the paramount
importance of the papacy.
I ask you a final time...
...before the awful penalties
are exacted upon you...
...why will you not swear?
Why will you not swear?
Oh, Madge.
-What?
-Madge.
I don't know. lt's funny.
Madge.
I like your dimples when you laugh,
Madge?
Your Majesty?
Come here.
Let me...
...examine your dimples...
...a little more closely.
Sir Thomas?
Thank you.
Oh, and Your Highness
might like to know...
...that the Reverend Fisher
is lodged in the room down below.
Good day to you, sir.